CIS 6600: Advanced Topics in Computer Graphics and Animation 

 

Authoring Tool Project (Spring 2026) 

Instructor: Dr. Stephen H. Lane 

University of Pennsylvania 

The goal of this project is to review state-of-the art research in the fields of computer graphics and 
animation as well as provide students with working knowledge of how to convert theory to practice by 
developing an associated graphics/animation authoring tool. Working in teams of two, students will design 
and develop an authoring tool that that facilitates the creation of a new type of user interaction, 
animation/simulation capability or 3D graphics special effect. Research papers published in the SigGraph 
Conference proceedings over the period 2015-2025 will provide the basis for the 
features/functionality/special effects that can be selected for implementation in the authoring tool. Each 
group will analyze the need and user requirements for the tool they plan to develop, prepare a formal 
software design document, construct a project work plan, develop the authoring tool functionality and user 
interface, test the design and demonstrate the authoring of associated content. A plug-in to standard 
authoring tools such as Maya or Houdini must also be developed to enable importing of appropriate assets 
and/or exporting of results. 

DELIVERABLES 

The authoring tool project includes the following deliverables: 

 

1. High Concept doc for the Authoring Tool – Due Wed., Feb. 11th 

 Please use the template provided for your High Concept Doc 


2. Literature Survey for your Authoring Tool Design Doc – Due Wed, Feb. 18th 

 In order to create the Literature Survey, you will need to read the papers referenced in the paper 
you have chosen to implement, then chain backwards through a number of levels of references 
until you identify/reach the seminal work(s). Once the seminal work(s) have been identified, you 
can then chain forward to trace the evolution of the research. In this document you need to include 
a tree-like graph showing the evolution of the research from the seminal work to the paper you 
have chosen to implement along with descriptions of the enhancements/improvements/ 
contributions made by each of the subsequent works. Examples of the Literature Survey can be 
found in the Modules/Authoring Tool/Literature Survey Example section of the CIS6600 Canvas 
site 


3. Authoring Tool Design Doc – Due Wed, Feb. 25th 

 Please use the template provided for your Authoring Tool Design Doc. Examples of the past 
Authoring Tool Design Docs can be found in the Modules/Authoring Tool/Design Doc Examples 
section of the CIS6600 Canvas site 


4. Version Due Dates and Design Reviews 

 Preliminary Design Review – Wed, Feb. 25th 
 Alpha Version/Design Review – Wed., Mar. 25th 
 Beta Version/Design Review – Wed., April 15th 
 Final Version Demo – Wed, May 5th 


5. Final Version 

 Final Version Project Code and Videos Due – May 11th 



