BSwarm: Biologically-Plausible Dynamics Model of Insect Swarms 

Xinjie Wang∗ 
Jiaping Ren† 
Xiaogang Jin‡ 
Dinesh Manocha§ 
State Key Lab of CAD&CG Department of Computer Science 
Zhejiang University University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 

http://www.cad.zju.edu.cn/home/jin/sca2015/sca2015.htm 


Figure 
1: 
A variety of insect swarms can be simulated by our approach: (left) a swarm of fruitflies in a huge glass box, (middle) a swarm of 
male flies compete for a female (the green one), and (right) a large swarm of migratory locusts passes through a village. 

Abstract 

We present a biologically plausible dynamics model to simulate 
swarms of flying insects. Our formulation, which is based on biological
 conclusions and experimental observations, is designed to 
simulate large insect swarms of varying densities. We use a hybrid 
formulation that combines a force-based model to capture different 
interactions between the insects with a data-driven noise model, and 
computes collision-free trajectories. We introduce a quantitative 
metric to evaluate the accuracy of such multi-agent systems and 
model the inherent noise. We highlight the performance of our 
dynamics model for simulating large flying swarms of midges, fruit 
fly, locusts and moths. In practice, our approach can generate 
many collective behaviors, including aggregation, migration, phase 
transition, and escape responses, and we highlight the benefits over 
prior methods. 

CR 
Categories: 
I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional 
Graphics and Realism—Virtual Reality I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: 
Three-Dimensional Graphics and Realism—Animation; 

Keywords: 
insect swarm, validation, crowd simulation 

1 Introduction 

Collective biological behaviors are frequently observed in the real 
world. Such behaviors are used to characterize the coordinated behavior
 of large groups of similar animal. They have been well stud


wangxinjie@zjucadcg.cn yrenjiaping@zjucadcg.cn zjin@cad.zju.edu.cn xdm@cs.unc.edu 

ied in computer graphics and related areas, such as social networks, 
artificial intelligence, sociology, and biology. Sociologists and 
ethologists have proposed many models to understand collective 
animal behaviors and these models are frequently used for character 
AI in computer games, virtual reality, and animation [Reynolds 
1987; Funge et al. 1999]. This includes creating intelligently 
behaving non-player characters, generating special effects, and 
modeling social dynamics in multi-player games. 

In this paper, we address the problem of modeling the collective 
behaviors and trajectories of swarms of flying insects. Insects are 
among the most diverse groups of animals on the planet, and there 
are more than a million described species representing more than 
half of all known living organisms. Insect swarms exhibit many 
collective behaviors that are different from other animals, such as 
aggregation, phase transition, positive phototaxis, large migration, 
escape response, etc. [Rauch et al. 1995; Rogers et al. 2003]. As a 
result, a major challenge is to develop models that can generate all 
these collective behaviors. 

Research advances in capture technologies and high-speed imaging 
have yielded experimental evidence that offers new insights on how 
insect swarms dynamically form and evolve. It has been shown that 
individual insects interact via forces [Couzin et al. 2002; Puckett 
et al. 2014]. Another key swarm characteristic is inherent noise, 
which corresponds to the random movement of insects in a swarm 
[Buhl et al. 2006; Yates et al. 2009]. In addition, it has been shown 
that the insect density within a swarm can vary considerably; for 
example, mosquito swarms exhibit a very high density around the 
swarm centroid. 

Main 
Results: 
We present a biologically-motivated dynamics 
model for insect swarms (BSwarm). Our approach is governed 
by biological conclusions and experimental observations. We 
describe a force-based model that can capture different interactions 
between the insects and computes a collision-free trajectory for 
each individual insect. We also present a novel quantitative metric 
for evaluating such multi-agent systems that takes into account the 
inherent noise in the dynamics model. The two novel components 
include: 


(a) (b) (c) (d) 
Figure 
2: 
Competition for mates: (a) at first, males fly freely in a swarm; (b) the males close to the female chase her; (c) other males detect 
the female neighbor movements; and (d) after a period of time, most of the males found the female. 

1. 
Dynamics 
Model: 
Our dynamics model is based on hybrid 
formulation and consists of three components: interaction forces, 
self-propulsion forces and inherent noise forces. Moreover, we use 
a data-driven approach to model the induced-noise force as Curl 
noise; our noise model is derived using our quantitative metric and 
real-world datasets. We perform local collision avoidance using the 
reciprocal velocity obstacles algorithm. The overall formulation is 
stable and can simulate large swarms with varying densities. 
2. 
Model 
Evaluation: 
We present a quantitative metric that can 
be used to evaluate the performance of multi-agent simulation 
algorithms in relation to real-world trajectory datasets. We use 
a statistical formulation that inherently accounts for noise in the 
dynamics model. We use seven time-varying metrics to evaluate the 
collective behaviors of insects and compute the optimal parameters 
for our dynamics model using a genetic algorithm. We also use the 
metric to evaluate the performance of different simulation models. 
We have implemented the overall algorithm and have used it to 
simulate the trajectories and collective behaviors of various insects 
including midges, fruit fly, locusts, moths as well as bats (noninsects) 
over large indoor and outdoor environments. Our dynamics 
model can generate many collective behaviors including aggregation 
at different scales, locust migration, competition for mates, 
phase transition in terms of density passing a critical point, positive 
phototaxis, and escape responses to predator-like objects. Our 
approach can simulate very large swarms with tens of thousands 
of insects and handle high swarm densities. We also validate our 
model using two real-world datasets and highlight the benefits over 
prior methods for simulating insect swarms. 

2 Prior Work 

In this section, we give a brief overview of agent-based models and 
other techniques used to simulate insect behaviors. 

2.1 Agent-Based Collective Behavior Models 
Insect swarm simulation can be regarded as a type of simulation 
for collective behaviors known as multi-agent simulation. Multi-
agent simulation techniques have been widely studied in computer 
graphics, robotics, artificial intelligence, and related areas. To 
simulate swarming insects using these multi-agent techniques, we 
treat each insect as one of the interacting intelligent agents within 
an environment. 

Many algorithms have been proposed to simulate the behavior 
or compute the trajectory of each agent based on global path 
planning, local navigation, collision avoidance, and motion synthesis. 
The Boids model [Reynolds 1987] and other rule-based 
approaches [Musse and Thalmann 2001] use simple rules to govern 
the movement and behavior of different agents. Other techniques 
are based on social forces [Helbing and Moln´ar 1995], the cellular 

automata [Burstedde et al. 2001], velocity-based reasoning or optimization 
[van den Berg et al. 2011], etc. Most of these techniques 
have been used primarily for human-like crowd simulation, though 
Reynolds’ Boids model has also been used to simulate movements 
of birds and fishes. 

Some recent work in computer graphics on insect simulation 
includes a hybrid model based on noise function and potential 
fields [Wang et al. 2014] and a data-driven model for visual simulation 
[Li et al. 2015]. In contrast with these models, we propose 
an agent-based model to describe the dynamics of each individual 
and simulate the collective behaviors of the entire group. There is 
large scientific literature on collective behaviors of animal groups 
and many specific agent-based models have been proposed [Couzin 
and Krause 2003]. Our dynamics model is different from these 
methods and is able to generate many collective behaviors for 
different insects. 

2.2 Evaluation and Validation Techniques 
Many techniques are proposed to evaluate the results or improve 
the accuracy of multi-agent and crowd simulation algorithms. Most 
of these techniques compare the algorithms’ output with real-
world sensor data. Pettre´ et al. [2009] compute appropriate 
parameters based on Maximum Likelihood Estimation. In order 
to learn accurate parameters from real-world datasets, learning 
techniques have also been used [Ju et al. 2010; Charalambous and 
Chrysanthou 2010]. Wolinski et al. [2014] and Berseth et al. [2014] 
present parameter optimization-approaches to make the simulated 
trajectories matching real-world datasets. Guy et al. [2012] propose 
an entropy-based evaluation approach to quantify the similarity 
between real-world and simulated trajectories. But most of these 
techniques have been designed for and applied to pedestrians or 
human crowds. In contrast, our evaluation approach is designed for 
insect swarm trajectory datasets, and robustly handle the inherent 
noise to be found both in the trajectory data and in our model. 

3 Background and Overview 

In this section, we give an overview of our approach. We provide 
some background on insects and insect behaviors, introduce the 
notation, and finally highlight key aspects of our approach. 

3.1 Insects and Insect Behaviors 
An insect is a small autonomous entity flying in three dimensions 
that can perceive other insects and the obstacles in the environment. 
An insect swarm refers to a spatial aggregation of insects of similar 
sizes with collective (but no cooperative) behaviors. In our paper, 
we mainly deal with flying insects. 

There is considerable research on studying actual behaviors of insect 
swarms nature [Morse 1963; Rauch et al. 1995]. This research 
is aimed at understanding the biological rules at the lower scale 


(i.e. the insect level) which engenders the collective phenomena 
at higher scale (i.e., the swarm) [Lukeman et al. 2010]. Many 
researchers have analyzed experimental datasets to model or predict 
the behaviors of insect swarms. During the past decade, many 
researchers have argued that these behaviors or group patterns occur 
due to simple individual rules; they agree that there are at least 
three interaction rules for each individual in a group: a short-range 
repulsion, an intermediate-range tendency for an insect to align its 
motion with its neighbors, and a long-range attraction [Couzin et al. 
2002]. 
3.2 Overview 
Our goal is to develop an agent-based mathematical model to 
describe the dynamics of each individual insect and use them to 
simulate the collective behavior of insect swarms. In our force-
based model, we regard insects as identical self-driven agents with 
mutual interactions. A swarm consists of N 
agents with unit mass 
(i.e., the mass is 1). We use the symbol Fi 
to represent forces 
for a given insect i 
(i 
=1;:::;N). Our dynamics formulation 
uses a force-based model to generate a preferred velocity for each 
insect. This includes different type of forces. We also use reciprocal 
velocity obstacles to compute each insect’s actual velocity to avoid 
collisions with other insects and the obstacles [Li et al. 2015]. As 
shown in Figure 3, the equation to describe the dynamics of each 
insect in the swarm is given as: 

v˙ 
i;pref 
= 
ai 
= 
Fi;int 
+ 
Fi;pro 
+ 
Fi;. 
(1) 

As described in Section 3.1, we model two types of forces for each 
insect. The first type of force in Equation 1 is the interaction force 
Fi;int, which consists of a short-range repulsion, an intermediate-
range tendency for an insect to align its motion with its neighbors, 
and a long-range attraction. Lumen et al. [2010] suggest that Fi;int 
can also be fitted into a concentric zonal model (i.e., individual-
based concentric zones of forces; see the leftmost side of Figure 3), 
in which an insect interacts with all neighbors within a certain 
distance. 

The second type of force is called self-propulsion force Fi;pro. This 
force represents all external factors that contribute to the insect’s 
trajectory. Fi;pro 
is formulated as: 

Fi;pro 
= 
Fi;fric 
+ 
Fi;res, 
(2) 
where Fi;fric 
is the friction force corresponding to the drag on 
the movement of an insect, Fi;res 
is the response forces that 
arises when an insect senses danger or things of interest in the 
environment. 

Insects also exhibit noise-induced behaviors and instinct responses 
to the environment. In other words, these forces are exerted on each 
insect even if it is the only individual insect present in a swarm. 
The force exerted by inherent noise, an important characteristic 
of insect swarms, is represented here by the term, Fi;. In order 
to model the noise function, we consider different choices for the 
stochastic term, including white noise (W), Gaussian white noise 
(G), Perlin noise (P), and curl noise (C) [Bridson et al. 2007]. Our 
experimental results, based on our evaluation metric (see Section 
5), indicate that curl noise provides us the best result. The noise 
term is represented as: 

Fi;ξ 
= 
C(ri), 
(3) 
where C(ri) 
denotes the curl noise function we used. 

It is important to prevent collisions, both between insects in the 
swarm and with obstacles in the environment. One key issue 
is to ensure that our approach can deal with large and dense 
simulations of swarms. There are some widely-used collision 
avoidance algorithms used for multi-agent simulation and human 
crowds, such as the ones based on social forces [Helbing and 
Moln´ar 1995] and reciprocal velocity obstacles (RVOs) [van den 

Berg et al. 2011]. However, algorithms based on social forces 
can have stability problems in dense scenarios and the resulting 
simulation needs to take very small time steps. Therefore, we use 
the geometric optimization algorithm based on RVOs to compute 
collision free trajectories for each insect. The underlying collision 
avoidance algorithm fR 
is stable, in terms of using large time steps, 
and also works well in dense situations. The preferred velocity 
Vpref 
= 
fvi;pref 
ji 
=1 
:::N} 
for each insect is generated by 
Equation (1), and is used as an input to fR. We use RVOs to obtain 
the actual velocity V 
= 
fviji 
=1 
:::Ng: 

V 
= 
fR(Vpref 
). 


Finally, we use the actual velocities V 
to update insects’ positions 
at each time step: r_i 
= 
vi. 


4 Insect Dynamics Model 

In this section, we give details of our dynamics model that is 
inspired by biological observations. As introduced in Section 3.2, 
insect behaviors are dominated by three type of forces: interaction 
force, self-propulsion force, and inherent-noise force. 

4.1 Interaction Force 
Interaction force depends on an insect’s neighbors and on the 
transition zones depicted by concentric circles (or the spheres in 
3D). The borders of zones for repulsion, alignment, or attraction 
for a given insect are defined by the radii rrep, rali, and ratt 
with 
the conditions ratt 
> 
rali 
> 
rrep 
> 
0 
[Couzin et al. 2002], as 
shown in Figure 3. For a given insect i 
, if another insect j 
is within 
its range ratt, then j 
is classified as a neighbor of i. The interaction 
force of i 
is computed as an average of the influences exerted by 
neighbors: 

Nk

XX

k

Fi;int 
= 
Fi;k, 
Fi;k 
=(g(rji)^rji 
+ 
(1 
􀀀jg(rji)j)^vji). 
(4)
Nk

kj=1 


In this equation, repulsion force Fi;rep, alignment force Fi;ali, 
and attraction force Fi;att 
are represented as Fi;k 
with k 
= 
frep, 
ali, 
attg; k 
> 
0 
stands for weighting parameters for each 
force, respectively; Nk 
is the number of neighbors located in the 
corresponding zone for that function. Other notations are described 
as follows: rji 
= 
krj 
− 
rik2, ^rji 
=(rj 
− 
ri)=rji, v^ji 
= 
(vj 
− 
vi)=kvj 
− 
vik2. The piecewise function g(x) 
is used to 
distinguish these zones:

⎧ 


⎨ 
􀀀1; 
0 
6 
x<rrep, 
g(x)= 
0; 
rrep 
6 
x<rali;

⎩ 


1; 
rali 
6 
x 
6 
ratt. 


4.2 Self-propulsion Force 
The self-propulsion force Fi;pro, introduced in Equation (2), is 
based on real observations. “Self-propulsion” means that the 
external forces arise from the insect’s reaction to the environment or 
other factors, not from its neighbors. Fi;pro 
is composed by Fi;fric 
and Fi;res. 

The friction function is expressed as Fi;fric 
= 
􀀀γ 
k 
vi 
k 
vi, where γ 
is the friction coefficient. The second term Fi;res 
denotes the response to environmental stimuli, such as predators 
approaching or prey passing by. In general, there are two types 
of stimuli for insects: predator-like objects, which create escape 
behaviors, and food/females, which create pursuit behaviors in 
male insects. According to the experimental results presented 
in [Domenici et al. 2011], insects usually escape away from the 
threat with relatively high variability and a limited angular sector 
(mainly 90 
− 
180). On the other hand, the pursuit behavior of 
insects is simple; they just directly fly towards the target [Lukeman 
et al. 2010]. Since there is little chance that insects will engage 
in escape and pursuit behaviors at the same time, we assume that 
the insects are responding to only one type of stimulus at any given 


Friction Force
Response Force+
Self-propulsionForceInteraction Force 
erent Zones
Figure 
3: 
Our 
Model: 
Overview of our biologically-driven insect swarm model (illustrated in 2D view). We highlight different components 
of our algorithm used to calculate the position of each insects at each time step, including two sets of forces: interaction forces and self-
propulsion forces. Interaction forces are represented by individual-based zones: insects follow forces that are represented in concentric zones 
of repulsion, alignment, and attraction to their neighbors. We use these forces to compute the acceleration and preferred velocity for each 
insect, and use velocity obstacles to perform collision avoidance and compute the actual velocity. The parameter estimation step is performed 
to compute the optimal parameters for our model. 

time. Let re 
denotes the position of an environmental stimulus, rres 
denotes the visual range of all insects. Fi;res 
is defined as: 

Fi;res 
= 
resH(rres 
− 
rie)(se^rieR(n;) 
− 
(1 
− 
se)^rie). 


Here res 
> 
0 
is the weighting parameter. H(x) 
is the Heaviside 
step function, which reflects whether an insect “sees” the stimuli. 
The rotation matrix R(n;) 
is adopted to generate an escape 
direction, where n 
= 
(0, 
1, 
0) 
is a rotation axis and θ 
is a random 
angle perturbation that obeys uniform distribution on [− 
π 
2 
, 
0]. The 
symbol variable se 
reflects the type of stimuli. se 
=1 
denotes 
the predator-like object and se 
=0 
denotes food or female to be 
chased. 

In Section 6, we evaluate the accuracy of each of these noise functions
 into our dynamics model by plugging Fi;ξ 
= 
fW, 
G, 
P, 
Cg. 
We observed that the Curl noise function can provide us the most 
accurate results both in simulation experiments and evaluation 
results. 

5 Model Evaluation 

The simplest technique for evaluating a model is to render the 
trajectories and observe the insect movements. However, it is 
not sufficient to evaluate whether a given dynamics model can 
capture all aspects of insects emergent behaviors based on visual 
rendering [Puckett et al. 2014]. We present a novel quantitative 
approach to evaluate our insect dynamics model by using real-
world trajectory datasets. Our approach takes into account some 
key aspects of insect behaviors and trajectories, based on seven 
time-varying metrics. 

Recent work in evaluating crowd simulation algorithms with respect
 to real-world trajectories is based on statistical and optimization
 methods [Guy et al. 2012; Wolinski et al. 2014; Berseth et al. 
2014]. Due to the inherent noise formulation in insect swarms
 [Wang et al. 2014], these methods are not directly applicable. 
It is possible that two different swarms with noisy trajectories 
may exhibit similar swarm behaviors even though their trajectory 
positions are quite different. Our approach uses discrete probability 
density distribution functions (PDFs), which are generated from 
the time-varying metrics and it reflects the global characteristics 
of insect swarm; as a result, the influence of a small amount of data 
abnormality or noise can be ignored. 

Our evaluation model is represented by the following equation 

which contains seven energy terms:

X 


E 
=1 
− 
wE. 
(5) 2Φ 


Inspired by the biological and physical research [Kelley and Ouellette
 2013; Flash and Hogan 1985; Buhl et al. 2006], we select 
seven time-varying metrics for calculating energy terms in Eq. 5, 
that is, = 
fv, 
a, 
!, 
, 
, 
d, 
g. v 
the velocity, a 
the acceleration, 
ω 
the angular velocity, α 
the angular acceleration, µ 
the Cartesian 
jerk, d 
the shortest distance, and η 
the velocity difference. We 
propose two new metrics to characterize the insect swarm behavior: 

v1􀀀v2

Cartesian jerk µ 
= 
, where µ 
is the magnitude of the 

(t)2 
2 
second order differential of velocity, v1, v2 
are the velocity 
changes of one insect in neighboring time points; and velocity 

jvnei􀀀vj

difference η 
= 
d 
, where vnei 
denotes the magnitude of 
velocity of the nearest neighbor. More details about these metrics 
are given in [Ren et al. 2015]. Eφ 
denotes the energy term about 
the metric , and wφ 
denotes the weight of E. 

For a metric φ 
in , Eφ 
is the energy term which represents the 
difference in discrete PDF between the real-world data and the 
simulation data. We formulate Eφ 
as 

Qreal 
􀀀Qsim

Eφ 
= 
φ 
, 
(6) 

1 


where Qreal 
denotes the discrete PDF of an insect swarm’s metrics 

φ 
from real-world captured data and Qsim 
represents discrete PDF of 

φ 


an insect swarm’s metrics from our swarm simulation model. We 

compute Eφ 
in four steps as follows: 
Step 
1: 
Sample the real data and the simulation data for the metric ; 

Step 
2: 
Normalize the samples with the z-score method which is 

refers to a mean shift followed by a standard deviation scaling; 
Step 
3: 
Compute the discrete PDFs [Billingsley 2008] of the real-
world data and the simulator’s data with normalized samples from 
Step 2; 

Step 
4: 
Compute the energy term E. 

We normalize the energy terms in Equation 6: 

Qreal 
􀀀Qsim 
φ 
− 
p1φ 


Eφ 
= 
1 
, 
(7) p2φ 


where p1φ 
and p2φ 
are normalization parameters. The computation Qreal 
􀀀Qsim

of φ 
is the same as in Equation (6). 

1 



Err1Err2Err3...
GeneticAlgorithmOptimalParameters
EvaluationModelInputObjective FunctionEstimating Real DataMetric DistributionModel M(P)
Metric Distribution
Figure 
4: 
Parameter-estimation algorithm (Par-Est algorithm). 
For a given real world trajectory data of insect swarm, we compute 
the discrete PDFs of the seven time-varying metrics with that data. 
Meanwhile, we use the parameterized dynamics model to simulate 
insects and compute the discrete PDFs of the seven time-varying 
metrics with the simulation data. Next, we evaluate the function 
given in Equation (5) and use that as an objective function for the 
genetic algorithm to compute the optimal parameters. 

5.1 Model Evaluation with Entropy Weight 
In this section, we describe our evaluation algorithm. The overall 
evaluation has two components: optimizing the dynamics model 
parameters and optimizing the weights of seven energy terms. 

We evaluate our dynamics model of an insect swarm with estimated 
optimal parameters (see Figure 4). The performance of our 
dynamics model is sensitive to the choice of underlying parameters. 
Therefore, we use a genetic algorithm to compute the optimal 
parameters by maximizing the evaluation function in Equation 5. 
However, when we use the evaluation model to evaluate different 
simulation techniques for insect swarms, it may require assigning 
a different weight to each energy term. Instead, we compute the 
weights of all energy terms automatically, and then compute the 
final weighted score to evaluate different insect simulation models 
for fair comparisons. We use the entropy-based evaluation method 
described in [Zou et al. 2006] to compute the weights of the 
evaluation model in Equation 5, as they can provide reliable results. 
More details are given in [Ren et al. 2015]. 

6 Results and Analysis 

In this section, we highlight the performance of our dynamics model
 on different insect swarms. We also analyze the accuracy using 
two real-world trajectory datasets and compare the performance 
with other multi-agent algorithms. 

6.1 Implementation 
We have implemented our approach in C++ on a PC with Intel 2 
Duo CPU E7500 and 4GB memory. Our current implementation 
uses the fixed-radius nearest neighbors search algorithm [Dickerson 
and Drysdale 1990] to accelerate spatial proximity queries to 
calculate Fint). All the timing results reported in this paper 
are generated using a single core. The results were rendered 
using Autodesk Maya 2014. The supplementary video shows the 
collective behaviors for different flying insects. We use the Curl 
noise to model the noise force. We use the RVO2 library [van den 
Berg et al. 2011] for local collision avoidance. We use our simulator 
to generate collective behaviors for midget, fruitfly, and locust. 
Furthermore, our dynamics model can also be used to simulate 
collective behaiviors of non-insects, such as bats. 

6.2 Real-World Datasets 
We use two insect trajectory datasets to compute the appropriate 
noise model and estimate the parameters of our dynamics models. 

Both these datasets were captured in an indoor setting with state-
of-the-art motion capture systems. The dataset-1 from [Kelley 
and Ouellette 2013] was captured in a transparent 91cm 
cubical 
enclosure with laboratory swarms of the midge Chironomus riparius.
 The total number of midges vary from 12 
to 111 
per frame. 
The three other datasets, dataset-2, dataset-3, and dataset-4 were 
captured in a cube of 2m 
edge length with hundreds of Drosophila 
(fruit fly) [Wu et al. 2011]. All these four datasets correspond 
to time-resolved measurements of the positions, velocities, and 
accelerations of individual insects, so we can compute the discrete 
PDFs of the seven metrics easily. We choose 500 
frames from each 
of these four datasets. 

Parameter 
Estimation: 
Our dynamics model, described in Section 
4, can be regarded as a parameterized dynamics model. The 
computation of different forces is governed by 11 
parameters. 7 
of them, including , rep, rrep, att, ratt, scale 
and gain, are 
estimated based on the real-world datasets. The other four parameters:
 ali, rali, res 
and rres, cannot be estimated since our real-
world datasets do not exhibit significant alignment tendency [Kelley 
and Ouellette 2013] or there is no specific external stimuli. As a 
result, we estimate them based on empirical observations, including 
alignment information [Lukeman et al. 2010] and the flying speeds 
and the visual range of the insects. 

Noise 
Estimation: 
Figure 5 shows the comparison results of the 
models based on the four different noise types with four different 
datasets. The Curl noise provides the most accurate results with 
respect to our four datasets. 

 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
dataset 1dataset 2dataset 3dataset 4Evaluation Value 
WHITE NOISE
GAUSSIAN WHITE NOISE
PERLIN NOISE
CURL NOISE
Figure 
5: 
The comparison results of our model with the four 
different noise functions. The evaluation value is the value of Eq. 5. 

The parameter estimation method is described in Section 5.1, and 
the values of the parameters used to generate our results are given 
in Table 1. 

6.3 Collective Behaviors 
(a) (b) (c) 
Figure 
6: 
Aggregation: (a) and (b) simulated swarms of midges 
moving in the environment with 500 
and 3, 
000 
midges, respectively.
 Other parameters are shown in Table 1; (c) a photo captured 
using a camera. 

Aggregation: 
We generated aggregation behaviors of midges at 
different scales. Figure 6(a) contains 500 
midges and Figure 6(b) 


Table 
1: 
Simulation performance and parameter settings of our results. In order to express the radii conveniently, we use the radii differences 

∗ 


ratt 
= 
ratt 
− 
rali, rali 
= 
rali 
− 
rrep 
instead. 

Midge Aggreagtion Fruitfly Mating Escape Bats Locust Phase Phototaxis 
#insect 100 
500 
3, 
000 
100 
100 
100 
500 
2, 
000 
200, 
000 
20 
∼ 
200 
20 
∼ 
80 
γ 
11:16 
8:76 
10:21 
13:0 
8:76 
15:0 
scale 
2:20 
2:75 
2:20 
1:72 
0:72 
3:42 
gain 
2:51 
1:79 
2:51 
0:36 
0:10 
2:0 
rep 
5:61 
1:74 
8:0 
3:0 
5:0 
3:0 
rrep 
0:17 
1:48 
2:0 
0:45 
0:2 
0:2 
att 
14:29 
10:39 
25:0 
5:0 
7:0 
8:0 
∗ 
ratt 
5:12 
4:49 
10:0 
5:0 
9:2 
10:0 
ali 
0 
5:0 
0 
3:0 
3:0 
20:0 
5:0 
10:0 
0 
∗ 
rali 
0 
1:0 
0 
10:0 
10:0 
3:0 
0 
2:2 
0 
res 
0 
0 
0 
10:0 
20:0 
10:0 
60:0 
0 
1:0 
rres 
0 
0 
0 
2.0 8:0 
10:0 
25:0 
0 
5:0 
Simulation 
FPS 489:87 
34:41 
1:49 
442:37 
146:79 
420:60 
37:25 
13:48 
0:018 
134:37 
528:19 


is simulated with 3, 
000 
midges in the same environment. The 
swarm flies erratically (i.e., the swarm center hardly changes) 
with different densities, 9, 
469:7=m3 
and 56, 
818:2=m3 
(with their 
body length set to 0:01m), respectively. 


(a) (b) (c) 
Figure 
7: 
Locust Migration: (a) and (b) simulated migratory 
locusts pass through a village. The number of locusts is 2, 
000 
and 200, 
000, respectively; (c) a photo captured from a video camera. 

Locust 
Migration: 
Figure 7 shows migratory locusts passing 
through a village. The locusts formed in a cuboid shape with 24:0m 
length, 5:0m 
width and 0:5m 
height. In this environment, we set a 
large stimulus for locusts to pursue (e.g. crop) . The locust swarm 
simulated has: (a) 2, 
000 
locusts with density 34:2=m3 
(we set 
locusts’ body length to 0:04m); (b) 200, 
000 
locusts with density 342=m3 
in the same space. 

Competition 
for 
mates: 
Figure 2 shows a swarm of male flies 
competing for a female (shown as glowing green). We generated 
this behavior by regarding the female fly as a pursuit stimulus. The 
collective behavior is generated based on known behaviors of males 
and females [Dublon and Sumpter 2014]. 

Phase 
transition: 
This behavior occurs when the increasing 
density of a swarm passes through a critical point. Viscek et 
al. [1995] generate such behaviors by continuously manipulating 
the parameters. We model it by decreasing the noise force and 
increasing the alignment component, ali. 

Positive 
phototaxis: 
In this scenario, a succession of moths gather 
around a street lamp. We set the lamp holder as an external stimulus 
to attract the moths towards it. We also mark the lamp as an obstacle 
to avoid collisions with moths based on RVOs. 

Startle/escape 
response: 
Figure 8 highlights the fly swarm’s 
responses to a predator-like object. In this scenario, we use the 
sphere as an external danger. When it approaches, each insect will 
choose a determined direction in which to escape. 

Swarm 
of 
bats 
in 
a 
cave: 
Although bats are not insects, bat swarms 
often exhibit similar patterns as insect swarms. Bats have the ability 
to respond rapidly due to echolocation. In Figure 9(b), we show a 


(a) (b) 
Figure 
9: 
Interior swarm of bats rapidly responding due to 
echolocation simulated using our dynamics model: (a) a snapshot 
of the simulated bats by our model; (b) a real photo of bats. 

real-world image of a bat swarm flying as a ring-shape in a dark 
cave. We simulate echolocation behavior by setting a changing 
stimulus in front of each bat (Figure 9(a)). 

6.3.1 Comparisons and Benefits 
We have compared 4 parameterized multi-agent simulation models 
based on the algorithm described in Section 5.1: RVO model
 [van den Berg et al. 2011], the Boids model [Reynolds 1987], 
the Noise-aware model for simulating insects [Wang et al. 2014], 
and a Brownian dynamics model [Schweitzer et al. 1998]. For each 
model, we used our parameter estimation algorithm to compute the 
optimal parameters. Figure 10 shows results comparing the five 
models with four different ground truth datasets, and highlight the 
relative benefits of our approach. 

All the forces in our model are useful. If we remove the RVOs, 
insects can have collisions. If we remove F, insects will not 
exhibit noise-induced behaviors. If we remove Fpro, we cannot 
simulate bats, mating behaviors of flies, and the escape responses. 

As compared to prior methods, our model has many advantages. 
Some recent methods [Wang et al. 2014; Li et al. 2015] cannot 
simulate phase transitions and escape behaviors due to lack of 
interaction forces and escape forces; Vicsek et al. [1995] cannot 
simulate mating and escape behavior, due to lack of response 
forces; Boids model [Reynolds 1987] cannot generate positive 
phototaxis and phase transitions due to lack of noise forces and 
can result in collisions in dense simulations. Moreover, none of the 
prior methods can simulate the bats behaviors and mosquito swarms 
(with a very high density around the centroid), as shown in video. 

Our approach is complimentary to [Li et al. 2015]. Our formulation 
of the dynamics model (Section 4) is driven by observed biological 
behaviors. Our approach for using a data-driven noise model uses 


(a) (b) (c) (d) 
Figure 
8: 
Startle/escape response: When a predator-like object (the sphere) approaches the swarm, insects escape and disperse quickly to 
avoid it. They aggregate again after the danger disappears. 

 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
dataset 1dataset 2dataset 3dataset 4Evaluation Value 
BSWARM
NOISE-AWARE
RVO
BOIDS
BROWNIAN
Figure 
10: 
We compared different multi-agent simulation with the 
real-world datasets. The evaluation value is the value of Eq. 5. Our 
biologically-plausible dynamics model provides higher accuracy 
with respect to the real-datasets as compared to other models. 

parameter evaluation techniques, which have been used for crowd 
and insect simulation. [Li et al. 2015] used density distribution to 
compute the waypoints that are used to compute insect trajectories 
to preserve their spatial swarming patterns. In contrast, our 
metric takes into account discrete probability density distribution 
functions, as explained in section 5. Moreover, our approach allows 
us to intuitively change the parameters to generate different swarm 
behaviors (Section 6.3.2). 

6.3.2 Generating Different Swarm Behaviors 
As mentioned above, our model has 11 
parameters. These parameters 
can be modified to generate different swarm behaviors. For 
example, Increase the value of rrep 
will make insects fly apart 
away from each other so the swarm will result in a lower density. 
if we increase the value of rali, insects will tend to follow its 
neighbors’ purposes (e.g., exhibiting the mating behavior). Larger 
ratt 
will bring more dense swarms and results in mosquitoes-like 
aggregation (see the video). Please refer to [Ren et al. 2015] for 
more details. Increasing rres 
will expand the visual range of all 
insects, and make them escape much before the predator arrives 
close to them. 

If we increase the weighting variables frep;ali;att;resg, the corresponding 
forces applied on insects will increase (and vice-versa). 
i.e., insects will accelerate faster to move away from (or close to) 
others when rep 
(or att) increases, or escape quickly when res 
is large (the escape behavior). Please refer to [Ren et al. 2015] for 
more details. Decreasing the noise parameter scale 
will result in 
more noisy trajectories (and vice-versa), we can use it to generate 
different insect swarms with different noise frequencies (e.g. midge 
has a smaller scale 
while moth has a larger one). Increase in the 

gain 
value will directly increase the noise speeds of the insects. If 
we decrease gain 
and increase ali, it will result in phase transition 
behavior. Finally, the friction coefficient γ 
is usually decided by 
the type of insects. The animals with large wings (moths, bats) will 
overcome more air drag, so they will be assigned to a larger value 
of . 

7 Limitations, Conclusions and Future Work 

We have presented a biologically-plausible dynamics model (B-
Swarm) to simulate insect swarms. We use a force-based model that 
is based on biological conclusions and experimental observations. 
We also present a novel evaluation metric for multi-agent simulation 
algorithms that can take into account the inherent noise both 
in the model and in the real world datasets. We use these datasets 
for estimating the parameters of our dynamics model and use Curl 
noise to model insect trajectories. We have used our model on 
different flying insects and can generate many emergent behaviors 
and trajectory patterns. 

Limitations: 
Our current approach is mainly designed for adult 
flying insects, and may not be applicable to walking or swimming 
insects. Furthermore, it is not applicable to some eusocial insects 

(e.g. ants, bees), as the interaction rules may not be applicable. The 
accuracy of our parameterized dynamics model is governed by the 
accuracy and the different behaviors captured in real-world datasets. 
For example, the two specific datasets did not exhibit alignment 
tendency and had no major external stimuli. The evaluation model 
is based on statistical assumptions about the noise, which may not 
hold for all datasets. 
Future 
Work: 
There are many avenues for future work. In addition 
to overcoming the limitations, we would like to extend the model 
to simulate some very large swarms (e.g. millions of locusts). As 
we gather more outdoor datasets related to insect swarms, they can 
be used to improve the accuracy of our parameterized dynamics 
model. It would be useful to augment our metric with perpetual 
factors. Moreover, we would like to extend our dynamics model to 
other animal groups, and use them for computer games and special 
effects. 

Acknowledgments 

Xiaogang Jin was supported by the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (Grant nos. 61272298, 61328204). Dinesh 
Manocha is supported in part by ARO Contract W911NF-10-10506 
and the National Thousand Talents Program of China. 

References 

BERSETH, G., KAPADIA, M., HAWORTH, B., AND FALOUTSOS, 

P. 2014. SteerFit: Automated parameter fitting for steering 
algorithms. In ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on 

Computer Animation, ACM, New York, NY, USA, SCA ’14, 
ACM, 113–122. 

BILLINGSLEY, P. 2008. Probability and measure. John Wiley & 
Sons. 

BRIDSON, R., HOURIHAM, J., AND NORDENSTAM, M. 2007. 
Curl-noise for procedural fluid flow. ACM Trans. Graph. 26, 3, 
1–4. 

BUHL, J., SUMPTER, D. J. T., COUZIN, I. D., HALE, J. J., 
DESPLAND, E., MILLER, E. R., AND SIMPSON, S. J. 2006. 
From disorder to order in marching locusts. Science 312, 5778, 
1402–1406. 

BURSTEDDE, C., KLAUCK, K., SCHADSCHNEIDER, A., AND 
ZITTARTZ, J. 2001. Simulation of pedestrian dynamics using 
a two-dimensional cellular automaton. Physica A: Statistical 
Mechanics and its Applications 295, 3, 507–525. 

CHARALAMBOUS, P., AND CHRYSANTHOU, Y. 2010. Learning 
crowd steering behaviors from examples. In Motion in Games. 
Springer, 35–35. 

COUZIN, I. D., AND KRAUSE, J. 2003. Self-organization and 
collective behavior in vertebrates. Advances in the Study of 
Behavior 32, 1. 

COUZIN, I. D., KRAUSE, J., JAMES, R., RUXTON, G. D., AND 
FRANKS, N. R. 2002. Collective memory and spatial sorting in 
animal groups. Journal of Theoretical Biology 218, 1, 1 – 11. 

DICKERSON, M. T., AND DRYSDALE, R. 1990. Fixed-radius near 
neighbors search algorithms for points and segments. Information
 Processing Letters 35, 5, 269 – 273. 

DOMENICI, P., BLAGBURN, J. M., AND BACON, J. P. 2011. 
Animal escapology ii: escape trajectory case studies. The 
Journal of experimental biology 214, 15, 2474–2494. 

DUBLON, I. A. N., AND SUMPTER, D. J. T. 2014. Flying insect 
swarms. Current Biology 24, 18, R828–R830. 

FLASH, T., AND HOGAN, N. 1985. The coordination of arm 
movements: an experimentally confirmed mathematical model. 
The journal of Neuroscience 5, 7, 1688–1703. 

FUNGE, J., TU, X., AND TERZOPOULOS, D. 1999. Cognitive 
modeling: Knowledge, reasoning and planning for intelligent 
characters. In Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH, SIGGRAPH 
’99, ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 29–38. 

GUY, S. J., VAN DEN BERG, J., LIU, W., LAU, R., LIN, M. C., 
AND MANOCHA, D. 2012. A statistical similarity measure for 
aggregate crowd dynamics. ACM Trans. Graph. 31, 6, 190:1– 
190:11. 

HELBING, D., AND MOLN ´ AR, P. 1995. Social force model for 
pedestrian dynamics. Phys. Rev. E 51, 5, 4282–4286. 

JU, E., CHOI, M. G., PARK, M., LEE, J., LEE, K. H., AND 
TAKAHASHI, S. 2010. Morphable crowds. ACM Trans. Graph. 
29, 6, 140:1–140:10. 

KELLEY, D. H., AND OUELLETTE, N. T. 2013. Emergent 
dynamics of laboratory insect swarms. Sci. Rep. 3, 1073. 

LI, W. P., WOLINSKI, D., PETTRE´
, J., AND LIN, M. 2015. 
Biologically-inspired visual simulation of insect swarms. In 
Computer Graphics Forum, Wiley Online Library. 

LUKEMAN, R., LI, Y.-X., AND EDELSTEIN-KESHET, L. 2010. 
Inferring individual rules from collective behavior. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences 107, 28, 12576–12580. 

MORSE, R. A. 1963. Swarm orientation in honeybees. Science 
141, 3578, 357–358. 

MUSSE, S. R., AND THALMANN, D. 2001. Hierarchical model 
for real time simulation of virtual human crowds. Visualization 
and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 7, 2, 152–164. 

PETTRE´
, J., OND ˇREJ, J., OLIVIER, A.-H., CRETUAL, A., AND 
DONIKIAN, S. 2009. Experiment-based modeling, simulation 
and validation of interactions between virtual walkers. In 
Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium
 on Computer Animation, ACM, 189–198. 

PUCKETT, J. G., KELLEY, D. H., AND OUELLETTE, N. T. 
2014. Searching for effective forces in laboratory insect swarms. 
Scientific reports 4, 4766. 

RAUCH, E. M., MILLONAS, M. M., AND CHIALVO, D. R. 1995. 
Pattern formation and functionality in swarm models. Physics 
Letters A 207, 3, 185–193. 

REN, J., WANG, X., JIN, X., AND MANOCHA, D. 2015. Data-
driven Noise Model for Simulating Swarms of Flying Insects. 
Technical Report. 

REYNOLDS, C. W. 1987. Flocks, herds and schools: A distributed 
behavioral model. SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph. 21, 4, 25–34. 

ROGERS, S. M., MATHESON, T., DESPLAND, E., DODGSON, T., 
BURROWS, M., AND SIMPSON, S. J. 2003. Mechanosensoryinduced
 behavioural gregarization in the desert locust schistocerca
 gregaria. Journal of Experimental Biology 206, 22, 3991– 
4002. 

SCHWEITZER, F., EBELING, W., AND TILCH, B. 1998. Complex 
motion of brownian particles with energy depots. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
80, 23, 5044–5047. 

VAN DEN BERG, J., GUY, S., LIN, M., AND MANOCHA, D. 
2011. Reciprocal n-body collision avoidance. In Robotics 
Research, C. Pradalier, R. Siegwart, and G. Hirzinger, Eds., 
vol. 70 of Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 3–19. 

VICSEK, T., CZIR ´OK, A., BEN-JACOB, E., COHEN, I., AND 
SHOCHET, O. 1995. Novel type of phase transition in a system 
of self-driven particles. Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 6, 1226–1229. 

WANG, X., JIN, X., DENG, Z., AND ZHOU, L. 2014. Inherent 
noise-aware insect swarm simulation. Computer Graphics Forum
 33, 6, 51–62. 

WOLINSKI, D., J GUY, S., OLIVIER, A.-H., LIN, M., 
MANOCHA, D., AND PETTRE´
, J. 2014. Parameter estimation 
and comparative evaluation of crowd simulations. In Computer 
Graphics Forum, vol. 33, Wiley Online Library, 303–312. 

WU, H. S., ZHAO, Q., ZOU, D., AND CHEN, Y. Q. 2011. 
Automated 3d trajectory measuring of large numbers of moving 
particles. Optics express 19, 8, 7646–7663. 

YATES, C. A., ERBAN, R., ESCUDERO, C., COUZIN, I. D., 
BUHL, J., KEVREKIDIS, I. G., MAINI, P. K., AND SUMPTER, 

D. J. T. 2009. Inherent noise can facilitate coherence in 
collective swarm motion. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences 106, 14, 5464–5469. 
ZOU, Z.-H., YUN, Y., AND SUN, J.-N. 2006. Entropy method 
for determination of weight of evaluating indicators in fuzzy 
synthetic evaluation for water quality assessment. Journal of 
Environmental Sciences 18, 5, 1020–1023. 


