 Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 305, 1-15 (1984) [ 1 ] 
Printed in Great Britain 
THE AERODYNAMICS OF HOVERING 
INSECT FLIGHT. 
I. THE QUASI-STEADY ANALYSIS 
BY C. P. ELLINGTON 
Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK. 
(Communicated by Sir James Lighthill, F.R.S. - Received 28 March 1983) 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
1. INTRODUCTION 2 
2. THE BLADE-ELEMENT THEORY 3 
3. KINEMATIC GROUPS 5 
3.1. Horizontal stroke plane 5 
3.2. Inclined stroke plane 6 
3.3. Vertical stroke plane 8 
4. THE PROOF-BY-CONTRADICTION 10 
5. OUTLINE OF THE PRESENT STUDY 11 
6. SYMBOL TABLE 12 
REFERENCES 14 
The conventional aerodynamic analysis of flapping animal flight invokes the 'quasi- 
steady assumption' to reduce a problem in dynamics to a succession of static 
conditions: it is assumed that the instantaneous forces on a flapping wing are 
equivalent to those for steady motion at the same instantaneous velocity and angle 
of attack. The validity of this assumption and the importance of unsteady aerodynamic 
effects have long been controversial topics. Weis-Fogh tested the assumption for 
hovering animal flight, where unsteady effects are most pronounced, and concluded 
that most insects indeed hover according to the principles ofquasi-steady aerodynamics. 
The logical basis for his conclusion is reviewed in this paper, and it is shown that 
the available evidence remains ambiguous. 
The aerodynamics of hovering insect flight are re-examined in this series of six 
papers, and a conclusion opposite to Weis-Fogh's is tentatively reached. New 
morphological and kinematic data for a variety of insects are presented in papers II 
and III, respectively. Paper IV offers an aerodynamic interpretation of the wing 
kinematics and a discussion on the possible roles of different aerodynamic mechanisms. 
A generalized vortex theory of hovering flight is derived in paper V, and provides 
a method of estimating the mean lift, induced power and induced velocity for unsteady 
as well as quasi-steady flight mechanisms. The new data, aerodynamic mechanisms 
and vortex theory are all combined in paper VI for an analysis of the lift and power 
requirements and other mechanical aspects of hovering flight. 
Vol. 305 B II22. I [Published 24 February I984p. 1



 2 C. P. ELLINGTON 
A large number of symbols are needed for the morphological, kinematic and 
aerodynamic analyses. Most of them appear in more than one paper of the series, 
and so a single comprehensive table defining the major symbols from all of the papers 
is presented at the end of this paper. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Research into the aerodynamic principles of flapping animal flight has long been hampered 
by a limited repertoire of investigative tools. Aerodynamics is primarily a practical science, 
concentrating on the forces experienced by a wing in steady motion. The effects of periodic 
variations in wing attitude and velocity superimposed on a mean motion have been investigated 
in flutter analysis, but such analytical treatments employ linearizations that restrict them to 
small amplitude oscillations. The scope for theoretical analyses of animal flight has thus been 
severely limited, and from necessity it is generally assumed that the instantaneous forces on 
a flapping wing are those corresponding to steady motion at the same instantaneous velocity 
and attitude, the quasi-steady assumption. Whether or not this assumption is valid for large 
amplitude, high frequency motions has been the source of much controversy, and a decisive 
test can only be accomplished by comparing measured instantaneous wing forces with those 
predicted by the assumption. The aerodynamic characteristics of a wing in steady motion are 
easily determined, but a direct measurement of the cyclic forces produced by flapping animal 
wings has only been achieved recently (Cloupeau et al. I979; Buckholtz I98I), and a 
comprehensive test of the assumption using these difficult techniques is still lacking. Researchers 
have therefore been forced to adopt a debatable assumption which could not be tested 
experimentally. 
The validity of the quasi-steady explanation of flapping flight can be tested theoretically only 
in a proof-by-contradiction. The mean forces generated by the wings during a cycle are 
calculated according to the quasi-steady assumption. If these forces do not satisfy the net force 
balance of the flying animal, then the assumption must be false. If the mean quasi-steady forces 
do satisfy the balance, then the only logical conclusion is that the assumption cannot be 
discounted. The range of forces generated by wings is restricted by physical considerations: 
unconventional aerodynamic mechanisms may produce mean, and even instantaneous, forces 
very similar to the quasi-steady values. A satisfactory explanation of flight based on the 
quasi-steady assumption cannot preclude alternative mechanisms. 
The early quantitative studies on the aerodynamics of flapping flight have been reviewed 
by Weis-Fogh & Jensen (I956). The available data on wing motion, the kinematics, were 
incomplete and often inaccurate, so it was usually necessary to base the theories on rough 
kinematic approximations. Some studies concluded that the wing forces were not consistent 
with a quasi-steady mechanism, but the sources of error were too large for an unqualified 
acceptance of the conclusions. In a classic series of papers Weis-Fogh andJensen then presented 
what is still the most complete study of flapping flight for the desert locust Schistocerca gregaria. 
The kinematics of fast torward flight and the aerodynamic characteristics of the wings in steady 
motion were measured (Weis-Fogh I956; Jensen I956). Jensen (I956) then combined these 
data in a quasi-steady analysis and found that the mean calculated wing forces agreed well 
with those measured from locusts flying in a wind tunnel. This is a very persuasive argument 
for the quasi-steady explanation of fast forward flight, but it cannot be considered as a proof. 
Indeed, the cyclic force measurements of Cloupeau et al. ( I 979) on Schistocerca indicate that the 
quasi-steady mechanism is not a sufficient explanation in this case.p. 2



 THE QUASI-STEADY ANALYSIS OF HOVERING FLIGHT 3 
It is generally believed that the quasi-steady assumption is valid for fast forward flight because 
of the low value of the reduced frequency parameter. This parameter, the ratio of a flapping 
velocity of the wings to the forward flight velocity, may be expressed in several ways and was 
introduced to animal flight studies by Walker (1925). At low values, the steady flight velocity 
dominates the flow over the wings and reduces the spatial derivatives of the fluctuating 
aerodynamic parameters. Thus unsteady aerodynamic effects are small compared with 
quasi-steady ones. 
At slower flight speeds the reduced frequency parameter increases and unsteady effects should 
become more important. Hovering flight presents the extreme condition where the flight 
velocity is zero and the reduced frequency becomes infinite. Bennett (i 966) and Weis-Fogh 
(I972, I973) emphasized the increased significance of unsteady effects to be found in hovering 
flight. The wings accelerate and decelerate in a distance of only a few chord lengths: virtual 
mass forces and unsteady circulatory effects may no longer be negligible. The amplitude of wing 
rotation about a longitudinal axis during pronation and supination exceeds a right angle, and 
the rotational velocity is comparable with the flapping velocity. Under these conditions the 
aerodynamic behaviour of the wings may differ appreciably from the quasi-steady assumption. 
By exaggerating the unsteady aerodynamic effects of flapping flight, hovering thus presents an 
ideal case for the investigation of flight mechanisms. 
In addition to its advantage in stressing unsteady effects, a study of hovering is useful from 
other considerations. The force and moment balance during flight is simplified by the lack of 
a net horizontal thrust, and the effects of body lift and body drag can be ignored. The absence 
of a linear flight velocity acting in combination with the flapping velocity also reduces the 
complexity of the mathematical treatment. Excluding brisk manoeuvres and climbing flight, 
the lift coefficients of the wings during hovering must be greater than other types of flight 
because the relative velocity of the wings is not enhanced by the flight velocity. Thus hovering 
demands maximum lift coefficients, which are particularly useful when comparing the wing 
performance with steady-state conditions. Finally, the total power expenditure of the animal 
is greatest in hovering flight, providing a convenient case for physiological discussions. 
Weis-Fogh (I972, I973) applied a quasi-steady analysis to hovering animal flight and 
concluded that 'most insects perform normal hovering on the basis of the well-established 
principles of steady-state flow' (Weis-Fogh I973). The aerodynamics of hovering flight are 
re-examined in this study using new data and a new theory, and the opposite conclusion is 
strongly indicated. Before this work is presented, the previous approaches to the problem 
will be reviewed. 
2. THE BLADE-ELEMENT THEORY 
The usual aerodynamic treatment of animal flight is based on the blade-element theory of 
propellers developed by Drzewiecki. Osborne (I95i) derived the general equations that apply 
to flapping flight. The fundamental unit of the analysis is the blade element, or wing element, 
which is that portion of a wing between the radial distances r and r + dr from the wing base 
(figure 1 a). The aerodynamic force F' on a wing element can be resolved into a component 
normal to the flow velocity, called the lift, and a component parallel to the flow, called the 
profile drag (figure 1 b). The lift L' and profile drag Dpro for a wing section of spanwise width 
dr are 
L'= lpcUr CL, (1) 
D;ro = 1P CUr CD ,pro, (2) 
I1-2p. 3



 4 C. P. ELLINGTON 
where p is the mass density of air, c is the wing chord, and Ur is the relative velocity component 
perpendicular to the longitudinal wing axis. Any spanwise component of the relative velocity 
is assumed to have no effect on these forces. CL and CD, pro are lift and profile drag coefficients, 
which can be defined for unsteady as well as steady motion. According to the quasi-steady 
assumption, though, these coefficients are functions only of the Reynolds number and angle 
of attack of the relative wind for given profile characteristics. Equations (1) and (2) are resolved 
into vertical and horizontal components, integrated along the wing length and averaged over 
a cycle. For hovering flight the net force balance requires the mean vertical force to equal the 
weight of the animal, and the mean horizontal force to be zero. 
L'* F' 
(b) 
Dproo 
FIGURE 1. (a) The wingbeat during hovering is approximately confined to a stroke plane, which is inclined at an 
angle /3 to the horizontal. The aerodynamic parameters for a wing element of width dr and chord c are shown 
in a two-dimensional view in (b). 
The relative velocity is the vector sum of the flapping velocity U and the induced velocities 
of bound and wake vorticity. The blade-element theory ignores the existence of vortices, 
however, and so can reveal nothing of the induced velocity. Following Osborne (I 95 I), a mean 
value of the vertical induced velocity w0 is usually estimated by the Rankine-Froude axial 
momentum theory of propellers. 
One method of applying the blade-element analysis relies on successive stepwise solutions 
of equations (1) and (2). Complete kinematic data are necessary for this approach: the motion 
of the longitudinal wing axis, the geometrical angle of attack and the section profile must all 
be known as functions of time and radial position. The angle of attack of the relative wind ar 
can then be calculated, and appropriate values of CL and CD,pro selected from experimentalp. 4



 THE QUASI-STEADY ANALYSIS OF HOVERING FLIGHT 5 
measurements. This was the method used so effectively byJensen (I956) in his study of forward 
flight in the desert locust, but it becomes increasingly unreliable as the hovering state is 
approached, where momentum considerations show that the wake induced velocity reaches a 
maximum. For many hovering animals there are periods when the opposite wings are separated 
by a distance of less than a chord length, so that the bound vorticity of the opposite wing will 
also contribute significantly to the relative velocity of a wing. This effect can only be 
approximated and, when coupled with the crude estimate of the wake induced velocity, a 
considerable inaccuracy can be expected for the calculated value of ar. The lift coefficient is 
strongly dependent on a, so the solution to equation (1) is prone to serious error. 
Osborne (I 95 I) introduced an alternative method of analysis which solves for mean values 
of the coefficients, CL and CD, pro, satisfying the net force balance. This is equivalent to assuming 
that the force coefficients are constant along the wing and throughout the cycle. The assumption 
is not unreasonable, because the wings could well be operating at some optimal angle of attack. 
For small insects like Drosophila, CL is nearly constant anyway over the range of ar found during 
flight (Vogel I967). The mean lift coefficient is particularly interesting because it is also the 
minimum value compatible with flight; if CL varies during the wing beat then some instantaneous 
values must exceed CL. The kinematic detail required for this method is greatly reduced since 
only the motion of the longitudinal wing axis is needed. The geometrical angle of attack and 
profile section of the wings are extremely difficult to measure accurately, and one of the 
principal advantages of this method is its neglect of them. The double integrals of radius and 
time produced by manipulation of equations (1) and (2) can be separated when the coefficients 
are assumed to be constant; the resulting single integrals may then be reduced to morphological 
and kinematic parameters, allowing simple expressions to be derived for CL and CD, pro 
satisfying the integral constraints. 
The theoretical investigations of hovering flight have usually relied on the mean coefficients 
method (Weis-Fogh I 972, I973; Ellington I975; R. A. Norberg I975; U. M. Norberg I975, 
I976). The animals studied so far can be divided into three functional groups, for which 
different approximations can be used in the calculations outlined above. During a cycle the 
wings beat roughly in a stroke plane, which is inclined at an angle ,/with respect to the horizontal 
(figure 1 a); it is the attitude of this stroke plane that distinguishes the groups. 
3. KINEMATIC GROUPS 
3.1. Horizontal stroke plane 
The most commonly observed type of hovering is characterized by an approximately 
horizontal stroke plane (figure 2 a). This group was extensively discussed by Weis-Fogh (I972, 
I973), who called the pattern normal hovering, and includes the hummingbirds (Stolpe & Zimmer 
I939; Greenewalt I960) and most insects (Weis-Fogh I973). The amplitude of wing rotation 
during pronation and supination is large, enabling the wings to operate at an angle of attack 
favourable for lift on both the morphological downstroke and the upstroke (figure 2a, b). The 
wake induced velocity is small with respect to the flapping velocity of the wings for this group, 
resulting in a relative velocity very close to the horizontal (Ellington I978, I980). This justifies 
using the horizontal flapping velocity for Ur in equation (1) and neglecting any small drag 
contributions to the net vertical force. A mean lift coefficient is then easily found such that thep. 5



 6 C. P. ELLINGTON 
(a) 
(b) A W >\ 
FIGURE 2. (a). The wing tip path of a horizontal stroke plane. The wing attitude fuscus viewed from above. Adapted net lift given by the integral form of equation (1) balances the body mass. A mean drag 
coefficient cannot be determined by the integral constraints, but once CL is calculated an 
appropriate CD, pro may be selected from experimental measurements. 
In his comparative survey of normal hovering animals, Weis-Fogh (I973) used simple 
analytical expressions for wing chord and flapping velocity; a semi-elliptical wing planform 
was used, and the flapping velocity was taken as simple harmonic motion. These are reasonable 
approximations, permitting a quick calculation of CL, but increase the error to an estimated 
30 %. Table 1 presents some of Weis-Fogh's results and a Reynolds number Re for the wings; 
the Reynolds number is based on the chord and the mean flapping velocity at 0.7 of the wing 
length. CL for the small wasp Encarsiaformosa is taken from Ellington (I975). In this case the 
wing shape and velocity were not well represented by Weis-Fogh's approximations and a more 
detailed treatment was necessary. 
3.2. Inclined stroke plane 
Small passerine birds (Zimmer I94; Brown I963; U. M. Norberg I 7), bats (Eisentraut 
I936; U. M. Norberg I970, 1976) and the 'true' hover-flies of the subfamily Syrphinaep. 6



 THE QUASI-STEADY ANALYSIS OF HOVERING FLIGHT 7 
(Weis-Fogh I973) hover with the stroke plane inclined at a value of , between 300 and 400 
(figure 3). Dragonflies (Odonata) also hover in this manner, although , is about 600 (R. A. 
Norberg I975). These animals appear to generate relatively small forces on the upstroke. The 
dragonfly Aeschnajuncea strongly supinates its wings on the upstroke, making the angle of attack 
near zero (R. A. Norberg I 97 5). Excluding the hummingbirds, vertebrate fliers are anatomically 
unable to rotate their wings to this extent. The birds and bats partially flex their wings during 
the upstroke, however, and the individual primaries of birds are also rotated to a negligible 
angle of attack. Any lift on the upstroke of an inclined stroke plane would produce a large 
horizontal thrust component, and this is probably the explanation for insignificant upstroke The mean force on the downstroke is thus primarily responsible for mass support. 
(a) (c) 
(d) (e) (f) 
(g: (h X 
FIGURE 3. The wingbeat of the long-eared bat Plecotus auritus, illustrating an inclined stroke plane during hovering 
flight. Adapted from U. M. Norberg (1970). 
The relative velocity Ur on the downstroke should not be approximated by the flapping 
velocity; because of the inclination of the stroke plane, the induced velocity will reduce the 
value of Or well below U2. An accurate estimate of the induced velocity is therefore essential 
in calculating the magnitude and direction of the relative velocity. It is likely that previous 
estimates of the induced velocity are substantially too small (see papers V and VI), which led 
to an incorrect consideration of downstroke profile drag by Ellington (I980). From the results 
of R. A. Norberg (I975) and estimates based on papers V and VI, the value of CL required 
for weight support on the downstroke of Aeschnajuncea should lie between 3 and 4. U. M. Norberg 
(I975) calculated that CL must equal 5.3 for the net vertical force on the downstroke to balance 
the body mass of the pied flycatcher Ficedula hypoleuca. In paper VI, I estimate that CL for 
Ficedula is about 6.0, so a value between 5 and 6 can be expected. It should be noted that in 
both cases the morphological and kinematic data were not from the same animals, and so an 
un Known inaccuracy iS present.p. 7



 8 C. P. ELLINGTON 
The effects of different assumptions about upstroke forces on the mean coefficients were 
evaluated by U. M. Norberg (1976) in a thorough investigation of hovering in the bat Plecotus 
auritus. Her results demonstrate that minimum coefficients occur when no lift is generated on 
the upstroke, which then requires CL= 3.1 on the downstroke; my estimate of CL is about 4.3 
(paper VI), and so a value between 3 and 4 seems probable. She also commented on Weis-Fogh's 
(I973) analysis of Plecotus, noting that his procedural simplifications were invalid. This is also 
true of his calculations for other animals using an inclined or vertical stroke plane. 
(a) ol(b) 
(C) (d) 
FIGURE 4. The downstroke of a vertical take-off by Pieris brassicae. The stroke plane is vertical, and the wing motion 
is perpendicular to the chord. The vortex pattern created by the downstroke is indicated, and the resulting 
large-cored vortex ring is shown in vertical section in (d). 
3.3. Vertical stroke plane 
In addition to the insects covered in paper III, I have filmed the Large Cabbage White butterfly 
Pieris brassicae L. in free flight. A unique kinematic pattern, an approximately vertical stroke 
plane, is often seen during take-off and hovering. Figure 4 shows several stages of the down- 
stroke which initiates a vertical take-off from a small platform. The wings are clapped together 
dorsally at the start of the downstroke, and then 'fling' open (Weis-Fogh I973) as in figure 4 a. 
The wings move with the chord perpendicular to their motion (figure 4b, c) and nearly clap 
together at the end ofthe downstroke (figure 4d). The body pitches nose-up and the wings 
strongly supinate during the upstroke, which is not shown here, producing an angle of attack 
near zero. Thus little force is generated on the upstroke, as for the inclined stroke plane. 
The sustaining vertical force obviously results from the pressure drag on the wings during 
the downstroke. A drag mechanism of flight has been suggested several times for flight at 
Reynolds numbers below about 100 (Horridge I956; R. A. Norberg 1972 a, b; Bennett I973),p. 8



 THE QUASI-STEADY ANALYSIS OF HOVERING FLIGHT 9 
where thick boundary layers reduce the steady-state lift coefficients of wings. The drag is mainly 
due to skin friction at low Re, however, and is not very sensitive to ar. A drag mechanism based 
on a differential velocity of the half-strokes was therefore proposed (Bennett 1973), such that 
the downstroke velocity and drag were greater than the upstroke. However, the small wasp 
Encarsia was found to use a horizontal stroke plane and a circulatory lift mechanism (Weis-Fogh 
1973; Lighthill I973; Ellington 1975). I have also filmed the small fringe-winged insect Thrips 
physapus and the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster (Ellington 1983); the kinematics and 
aerodynamics are very similar to Encarsia. Ironically the drag mechanism does not operate for 
small insects, for which it was predicted, but rather for a large one at higher Reynolds number 
(about 2800). The pressure drag during the downstroke is much greater than the skin friction 
drag of the upstroke at high Re, and so the need for a velocity differential is eliminated. 
TABLE 1. RESULTS FROM THE QUASI-STEADY ANALYSIS 
(References: 1, Weis-Fogh (1972); 2, Weis-Fogh (I973); 3, Ellington (I975); 4, R. A. Norberg (I975); 
5, U. M. Norberg (1975); 6, U. M. Norberg (1976); 7, present study.) 
species CL Re ref. 
horizontal stroke plane 
Amaziliafimbriatafluviatilis 1.8 6100 (1) 
Melolontha vulgaris 0.6 3900 (2) 
Manduca sexta 1.2 5400 (2) 
Bombus terrestris 1.2 3600 (2) 
Apis mellifera 0.8 1600 (2) 
Eristalis tenax 0.9 1600 (2) 
Tipula sp. 0.8 630 (2) 
Drosophila virilis 0.8 210 (1) 
Encarsiaformosa 1.6 23 (3) 
inclined stroke plane 
Plecotus auritus 3-4 15000 (6,7) 
Ficedula hypoleuca 5-6 11000 (5,7) 
Aeschnajuncea 3-4 1900 (4,7) 
vertical stroke plane 
Pieris brassicae 0 2800 (7) 
Equation (2) of the blade-element analysis could be applied to the Large Cabbage White 
butterfly, but a constant value of CD pro on the downstroke is unlikely because of pressure 
interference from the opposite wings. A different aerodynamic approach has been developed, 
therefore, based on the vortex pattern created by the wing motion. Air rushes into the gap 
between the wings as they fling open at the beginning of the downstroke, producing a sink 
motion bounded by the vorticity on the wing surfaces and the free vortex lines connecting the 
leading edges and the trailing edges (figure 4 a). This flow pattern is maintained and 
strengthened during the downstroke, resulting in a large-core vortex ring (figure 4d). The 
reaction force and kinetic energy associated with this ring have been estimated from flow 
visualization photographs. Although this flight mechanism is conceptually quite simple, many 
subtle modifications to the flow are effected by wing twisting and flexibility, and a detailed 
analysis will be presented elsewhere (Ellington I983).p. 9



 10 C. P. ELLINGTON 
4. THE PROOF-BY-CONTRADICTION 
The mean lift coefficient has been chosen in all of the hovering analyses to test the quasi-steady 
assumption. If CL is greater than the maximum steady-state lift coefficient CL, max' then the 
assumption is contradicted and unsteady flight mechanisms must be invoked. When CL is about 
equal to CL, max the test is not conclusive: some variation of the lift coefficient is likely during 
a cycle, and instantaneous values may then exceed the mean. 
Values of CL, max are not known for the animals in table 1. For the insects we may value of 1.1 at Re about 2000 for the flat forewing of a desert locust, which rises to 1.3 when 
the vannal region is depressed as a flap (Jensen 1956). Nachtigall (I977) measured a smaller 
CL, max of 0.85, however, for a crane-fly (Tipula oleracea) wing at a similar Re of 1500. Vogel 
(i 967) found a value of 0.6 for a flat Drosophila virilis wing at a lower Re of 200, which increases 
to 0.8 for a cambered wing; his results are very similar to those of Thom & Swart (1940) for 
a flat-bottomed aerofoil in this low Re range. Of the insects in table 1, Encarsia and Aeschna 
are the only examples where CL definitely exceeds CL, max for the relevant Re, and unsteady 
effects are therefore indicated. The flight mechanism of Pieris has already been outlined and 
must also be considered as unsteady. Values of CL for the remaining insects are uncomfortably 
close in general to the expected values of CL max) and several lie in the region of uncertainty 
between Jensen's and Nachtigall's results. Because of this and the large margin of error in 
Weis-Fogh's (I973) analysis, no firm conclusions can be drawn concerning these insects. 
The values of CL, max for bird and bat wings are more controversial than those for insects. 
The wings are thin and highly cambered, and generally operate at Re between 104 and 105. 
Experiments on similar aerofoil sections have found CL, max up to 1.6; a very strong or an effective increase in camber resulting from leading edge and trailing edge flaps can raise 
the value to about 2.5 (Schmitz 1957; Abbott & Doenhoff 1959; Mises 1959; Tucker & Parrott 
1970; Hoerner & Borst 1975). Which of these sections best respresents avian and bat wings 
is not clear. Primary separation on the downstroke ofbirds may function as slotted or mul'ti-slotted 
flaps (Graham 1932), which can produce values of CL, max in excess of 3. The alula of bird 
wings is commonly raised in slow and hovering flight, increasing the lift some 25 % by acting 
as a Handley-Page leading edge slot (Nachtigall & Kempf 197 1). These comparisons indicate 
that CL, max may be about 1.6 for the wings, and possibly much more. 
Measurements on bird wings and wing models suggest that these values are too high. Even 
with the alula raised, CL, max for the wing of a house sparrow Passer domesticus is only 1.1 at 
Re 16000, and for a European blackbird Turdus merula it is only 0.8 at Re 24000 (Nachtigall 
& Kempf I 97 1). Measurements from many other bird wings over an Re range of 10000-50 000 
are much the same: 0.7-1.2 (Withers I98I). There are problems of course, to mounting a wing 
in a realistic attitude in a wind tunnel. Studies on wing models of the pigeon Columba livia show 
a similar range of values, however, from 0.8 to 1.2 (Nachtigall 1979). For gliding birds and 
bats values around 1.5 are found for the maximum lift coefficient based on wing area 
(Pennycuick I968, 1971; Tucker & Parrott 1970), but when the tail area is included as a lifting 
surface CL max drops to about 1.3 for the pigeon (Pennycuick I968). The values of CL max 
actually measured for bird wings and wing models are thus well below those that might be 
expected. 
For the hummingbird CL is 1.8, which Weis-Fogh (I973) accepted as possible under 
quasi-steady conditions. Judging by the results above, I think that this is unlikely and unsteadyp. 10



 THE QUASI-STEADY ANALYSIS OF HOVERING FLIGHT 11 
effects will then be significant. For Plecotus CL is 3-4, which should be greater than CL,max 
for a bat wing. The quasi-steady assumption fails for Ficedula as well. 
The results of the analysis can now be summarized for the kinematic groups. The animals 
using an inclined or vertical stroke plane rely on unsteady flight mechanisms, as concluded by 
Weis-Fogh (I973); the quasi-steady mechanism is insufficient even as an approximation to the 
aerodynamic forces. Of the animals using a horizontal stroke plane, Encarsia must use an 
unsteady mechanism, and this is probably true for the hummingbird as well. The proof is not 
conclusive for the remaining animals, but their values of CL are very close to CL, max, 
From such results Weis-Fogh (I973) concluded that most animals hovering with a horizontal 
stroke plane rely on the quasi-steady flight mechanism. However, three points must be borne 
in mind when interpreting these results. If CL does not exceed CL, max) then the proof-by- 
contradiction only demonstrates that the quasi-steady assumption cannot be discounted; it does 
not prove that the assumption is true. Furthermore, some instantaneous values of the lift 
coefficient are likely to be greater than the mean CL over the cycle. And finally, the mean lift 
in unsteady motion can be substantially smaller than the quasi-steady estimate because of the 
Wagner effect, so the wings cannot actually achieve the maximum lift during hovering that 
is predicted by CL max (paper IV). In the light of these last two points, the close agreement 
between CL and CL, max could indicate that the quasi-steady mechanism is not able to provide 
sufficient lift for hovering. The example of the hummingbird could also lead to a conclusion 
contrary to Weis-Fogh's. The kinematics of most insects are similar to those of the hummingbird, 
and it would be surprising if different flight mechanisms were involved; if the quasi-steady 
explanation is indeed inadequate for the hummingbird, then it might not apply to the insects 
either. Much more research is obviously required before Weis-Fogh's conclusion can be 
substantiated or disproved. 
5. OUTLINE OF THE PRESENT STUDY 
The aerodynamics of hovering insect flight are re-examined in this series of papers, to evaluate 
the roles of quasi-steady and unsteady aerodynamic mechanisms. Any aerodynamic study must 
be based on accurate kinematic and morphological data, and the previous studies have usually 
been unsatisfactory in this respect: the amplitude of wing motion was often determined only 
by visual estimation, some of the data used by Weis-Fogh (1973) were from insects in slow 
forward flight, and the morphological and kinematic data were not from the same animals in 
the analyses of Aeschna, Ficedula and Amazilia. Papers II and III present complete data sets for 
a variety of insects to be used in this study. 
Weis-Fogh (I973) proposed two unsteady flight mechanisms for animals where the 
quasi-steady assumption fails, based on an aerodynamic interpretation of the wing kinematics. 
This approach is followed in paper IV to discuss the possible roles of different aerodynamic 
mechanisms. 
The flight mechanisms cohsidered in paper IV cannot be directly incorporated into the 
blade-element theory. A more generalized vortex theory is therefore developed in paper V, 
which calculates the mean lift for unsteady as well as quasi-steady mechanisms. The theory 
also provides more accurate estimates for the induced velocity and induced power than 
previously possible. 
The new flight data, aerodynamic mechanisms and vortex theory are all combined in paperp. 11



 12 C. P. ELLINGTON 
VI for an analysis of the flight mechanisms, their power requirements, and other mechanical 
considerations of hovering flight. 
This study would not have been possible without the help, encouragement and guidance of 
three men: the late Professor T. Weis-Fogh, who inspired the initial lines of research, Dr 
K. E. Machin, whose many talents and enthusiastic support were vital to the fruition of much 
work, and Mr G. G. Runnalls, whose photographic expertise was invaluable. To these three, 
I extend my warmest gratitude. 
6. SYMBOL TABLE 
This table contains all of the major symbols in this series of papers. Except for a few general symbols, the paper 
where each symbol is defined is given below. Some symbols are defined formally by equations, and this is indicated 
by XX.xx, where XX is the paper number and xx is the equation number within that paper. A 'hat' denotes a 
non-dimensional form of a symbol. Other modifications to symbols obey the following rules unless a special definition 
is presented below: subscripts 'max' and 'min' refer to maximum and minimum values, a bar over the symbol 
indicates a time-averaged mean value, a prime denotes a force per unit span, and an asterisk represents mechanical 
power per unit body mass. 
paper or 
symbol equation no. definition 
a V axial separation of vortex rings in the far wake 
A V cross-sectional area of the far wake 
Ao V.10 area of the actuator disc 
Ar V area of the vortex sheet produced by a half-stroke 
Al V rolled-up area of that vortex sheet 
? 11.4 aspect ratio of the wing pair 
b V radius of vortex rings in the far wake 
bo V radius of vortex rings at the actuator disc 
c II chord of the wing 
11.5 mean chord 
c II c/c 
C V.34 self-induced component of the vortex ring velocity 
CD drag coefficient 
CD,f IV.7 CD for a flat plate parallel to the flow 
CD, pro profile drag coefficient 
CL lift coefficient 
d 11.17 mean diameter of body/body length 
d/u III ratio of duration of downstroke to upstroke 
D VI magnitude of the mean profile drag vector 
1^ VI.32 D/mg 
Dpro profile drag 
f V frequency of lift impulses 
f VI f/wingbeat frequency 
F aerodynamic force on a wing 
or 
F V the force from a momentum jet 
g gravitational acceleration 
11.11 mean wing thickness/wing length 
I V circulatory lift impulse 
f V.5 non-dimensional form of I 
V the impulse required for weight support 
or 
I II moment of inertia 
Ib moment of inertia for animal body 
Iv ~~II moment of inertia for the virtual mass of a wing pair 
1w II moment of inertia for the mass of a wing pairp. 12



 THE QUASI-STEADY ANALYSIS OF HOVERING FLIGHT 13 
J 111.23 advance ratio 
k V.31 specific induced power factor 
K V.33 component of the vortex ring velocity due to other rings in the wake 
I 11.18 distance from anterior end of body to centre of mass/body length 
11 II distance from forewing base axis to centre of body mass/body length 
12 11.20 radius of gyration for the body/body length 
L II body length 
? II body length/wing length 
or 
L lift 
L VI mean lift/mg 
m body mass 
mw II mass of wing pair 
rAw II mw/m 
mk 11.8 the kth moment of wing mass about the wing base 
n wingbeat frequency 
Pd V disc loading 
Pw wing loading 
Pa VI aerodynamic power 
Pace VI.39 power required to accelerate mass and virtual mass of the wings 
Pind VI.20 induced power 
Pm VI mechanical power output of muscle 
VI Pm per unit weight of muscle 
Ppro VI.29 profile power 
PRF VI.21 Rankine-Froude estimate of induced power 
r radial position along the wing 
f r/wing length 
fk(m) 11.9 non-dimensional radius of the kth moment of wing mass 
fic(S) 11.7 non-dimensional radius of the kth moment of wing area 
fk (V) 11.16 non-dimensional radius of the kth moment of virtual mass 
R wing length 
Re VI.28 Reynolds number 
s V.36 spacing parameter 
S 11.3 wing area 
Sk II~1.6 kth moment of wing area 
t time 
t t/wingbeat period 
U flapping velocity of the wing 
Ur V.8 relative velocity of the wing 
Ut III flapping velocity of the wing tip 
v V axial velocity of vortex ring 
or 
v 11.13 virtual mass of a wing pair 
0 11.14 non-dimensional virtual mass of a wing pair 
Vk II.15 kth moment of virtual mass 
V III flight velocity 
V III V/nR = number of wing lengths travelled per wingbeat 
w V axial wake velocity in the far wake 
wo V axial wake velocity at the actuator disc = induced velocity 
WRF V Rankine-Froude estimate of w 
WO,RF V Rankine-Froude estimate of wo 
X0 IV distance from leading edge to axis of wing rotation 
xO IV xO/c 
a IV geometrical angle of attack 
at IV engle of incidence 
ao IV zero-lift angle of attack 
ar IV effective angle of attack 
ar. IV effective angle of incidence 
,3 IV half-angle between chords during fling 
or 
/, stroke plane angle 
I3o III value of fiin 'true' hovering 
,dr ~~VI.4 relative stroke plane anglep. 13



 14 C. P. ELLINGTON 
y VI.13 rotational lift coefficient 
r circulation 
r v non-dimensional circulation (=r/ ..) A A 
r v mean of r over area of vortex sheet 
j2 V mean of r2 over area of vortex sheet 
Fo V circulation of a pulsed Froude actuator disc 
a VI.34 magnitude of the mean profile drag/mean of the magnitude of the profile drag 
e IV. 14 downwash angle 
or 
e V core radius of vortex ring in far wake 
60 V core radius of vortex ring at actuator disc 
y1 III roll angle 
Va VI.53 aerodynamic efficiency 
6 111.22 angle of elevation of wing with respect to stroke plane 
A IV distance travelled by wing element/chord 
A IV. 17 value of A over a half-stroke 
A IV. 18 mean distance travelled by wing over a half-stroke/mean chord 
p kinematic viscosity of air 
6 III angle between mean flight path and the horizontal 
p mass density of air 
Pb II mass density of the body 
Pw II mass density of the wing 
a' V.43 spatial correction factor for induced power 
X V.44 temporal correction factor for induced power 
positional angle of wing in the stroke plane 
111.24 non-dimensional form of qJ 
stroke angle 
x III angle between longitudinal body axis and the horizontal 
Xo III free body angle 
w III angular velocity during pronation and supination 
6 III mean angular velocity/wingbeat frequency 
REFERENCES 
Abbott, I. H. & Doenhoff, A. E. von 1959 Theory of wing sections. New York: Dover 
Bennett, L. I966 Insect aerodynamics: vertical sustaining force in near-hovering flight. Science, N.Y. 152,1263-1266. 
Bennett, L. I973 Effectiveness and flight of small insects. Ann. ent. Soc. Am. 66, 1187-1190. 
Brown, R. H. J. I963 The flight of birds. Biol. Rev. 38, 460-489. 
Buckholtz, R. H. I 98 I Measurements of unsteady periodic forces generated by the blowfly flying in a wind tunnel. 
J. exp. Biol. 90, 163-173. 
Cloupeau, M., Devilliers, J. F. & Devezeaux, D. 1979 Direct measurements of instantaneous lift in desert locust; 
comparison with Jensen's experiments on detached wings. J. exp. Biol. 80, 1-15. 
Eisentraut, M. 1936 Beitrag zur Mechanik des Fledermausfluges. Z. wiss. Zool. 148, 159-188. 
Ellington, C. P. 1975 Non-steady-state aerodynamics of the flight of Encarsiaformosa. In Swimming andflying (ed. T. Y. Wu, C.J. Brokaw & C. Brennen), vol. 2, pp. 783-796. New York: Plenum Press. 
Ellington, C. P. 1978 The aerodynamics ofnormal hovering flight: three approaches. In Comparativephysiology - water, 
ions and fluid mechanics (ed. K. Schmidt-Nielsen, L. Bolis & S. H. P. Maddrell), pp. 327-345. Cambridge 
University Press. 
Ellington, C. P. I 980 Vortices and hovering flight. In Instationdre Effekte an schwingenden Tierfliigeln (ed. W. Nachtigall), 
pp. 64-101. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner. 
Ellington, C. P. I983 Paper in preparation. 
Graham, R. R. 1932 Slots in the wings of birds. Jl R. aeronaut. Soc. 36, 598-600. 
Greenewalt, C. H. I960 Hummingbirds. New York: Doubleday. 
Hoerner, S. F. & Borst, H. V. 1975 Fluid-dynamic lift. Bricktown, NewJersey: Hoerner Fluid Dynamics. 
Horridge, G. A. 1956 The flight of very small insects. Nature, Lond. 178, 1334-1335. 
Jensen, M. 1956 Biology and physics of locust flight. III. The aerodynamics of locust flight. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 
Lond. B 239, 511-552. 
Lighthill, M. J. 1973 On the Weis-Fogh mechanism of lift generation. J. Fluid Mech. 60, 1-17. 
Mises, R. von 1959 Theory offlight. New York: Dover. 
Nachtigall, W. 1977 Die aerodynamische Polare des Tipula-Flugels und eine Einrichtung zur halbautomatischen 
Polarenaufnahme. In The physiology of movement; biomechanics (ed. W. Nachtigall), pp. 347-352. Stuttgart: 
Fischer.p. 14



 THE QUASI-STEADY ANALYSIS OF HOVERING FLIGHT 15 
Nachtigall, W. 1979 Der Taubenflugel in Gleitflugstellung: Geometrische Kenngrossen der Flugelprofile und 
Luftkrafterzeugung. J. Orn., Lpz. 120, 30-40. 
Nachtigall, W. & Kempf, B. 1971 Vergleichende Untersuchungen zur Flugbiologischen Funktion des Daumen- 
fittichs (Alula spuria) bei Vogeln. Z. vergl. Physiol. 71, 326-341. 
Norberg, R. A. 1972 a Flight characteristics of two plume moths, Alucita pentadactyla L. and Orneodes hexadactyla L. 
(Microlepidoptera). Zool. Scr. 1, 241-246. 
Norberg, R. A 1972 b Evolution of flight of insects. Zool. Scr. 1, 247-250. 
Norberg, R. A. 1975 Hovering flight of the dragonfly Aeschnajuncea L., kinematics and aerodynamics. In Swimming 
andflying in Nature (ed. T. Y. Wu, C. J. Brokaw & C. Brennen), vol. 2, pp. 763-781. New York: Plenum Press. 
Norberg, U. M. 1970 Hovering flight of Plecotus auritus L. Bijdr. Dierk 40, 62-66. (Proc. 2nd int. Bat Res. Conf.) 
Norberg, U. M. 1975 Hovering flight of the pied flycatcher (Ficedula hypoleuca). In Swimming and flying in Nature 
(ed. T. Y. Wu, C. J. Brokaw & C. Brennen), vol. 2, pp. 869-881. New York: Plenum Press. 
Norberg, U. M. 1976 Aerodynamics of hovering flight in the long-eared bat Plecotus auritus. J. exp. Biol. 65, 459-470. 
Osborne, M. F. M. 195I Aerodynamics of flapping flight with application to insects. J. exp. Biol. 28, 221-245. 
Pennycuick, C. J. I 968 A wind-tunnel study of gliding flight in the pigeon Columba livia. J. exp. Biol. 49, 509-526. 
Pennycuick, C. J. 197 I Gliding flight of the dog-faced bat Rousettus aegyptiacus observed in a wind-tunnel. J. exp. 
Biol. 55, 833-845. 
Schmitz, F. W. 1957 Aerodynamik des Flugmodells. Duisburg: Carl Lange Verlag. 
Stolpe, M. & Zimmer, K. 1939 Der Schwirrflug des Kolibri im Zeitlupenfilm. J. Orn., Lpz. 87, 136-155. 
Thom, A. & Swart, P. 1940 The forces on an aerofoil at very low speeds. Jl R. aeronaut. Soc. 44, 761-770. 
Tucker, V. A. & Parrott, G. C. 1970 Aerodynamics of gliding flight in a falcon and other birds. J. exp. Biol. 52, 
345-367. 
Vogel, S. I967 Flight in Drosophila. III. Aerodynamic characteristics of fly wings and wing models. J. exp. Biol. 
46, 431-443. 
Walker, G. T. 1925 The flapping flight of birds. JI R. aeronaut. Soc. 29, 590-594. 
Weis-Fogh, T. 1956 Biology and physics of locust flight. II. Flight performance of the desert locust (Schistocerca 
gregaria). Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 239, 459-510. 
Weis-Fogh, T. 1972 Energetics of hovering flight in hummingbirds and in Drosophila. J. exp. Biol. 56, 79-104. 
Weis-Fogh, T. 1973 Quick estimates of flight fitness in hovering animals, including novel mechanisms for lift 
production. J. exp. Biol. 59, 169-230. 
Weis-Fogh, T. & Jensen, M. 1956 Biology and physics of locust flight. I. Basic principles in insect flight. A critical 
review. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 239, 415-458. 
Withers, P. C. I98I An aerodynamic analysis of bird wings as fixed aerofoils. J. exp. Biol. 90, 143-162. 
Zimmer, K. 1943 Der Flug des Nektarvogels (Cinnyris). J. Orn., Lpz. 91, 371-387.p. 15



